Awesome, great.
So today our topic, like Rachel mentioned,
is RStudio and SageMaker.
And maybe, I don't know if an apology
is the right phrase here,
but I have a two-year-old son
who's very into Spider-Man right now.
And as a result, I recently rewatched Into the Spider-Verse,
which is one of my all-time favorite movies.
And that's like heavily influenced the direction
that these slides have gone today.
So hopefully that makes sense.
And if not, we can just focus on the content
and less on the style that they're presented in.
But I actually kind of thought this fit
because as we go through this,
I consider both RStudio and SageMaker
both kind of superheroes in their own way
in the data science space.
And we're excited about this collaboration
and the ways in which they can complement
and kind of work with one another.
And we'll talk through that today.
Again, as Rachel said, my name is James Blair,
and I work as a solutions engineer here at RStudio.
Just to give kind of an outline of the plan for today.
First, we're just gonna talk briefly
about RStudio Workbench.
I'm operating under the assumption
that many of us are probably already familiar
with RStudio or RStudio Workbench to some degree.
But for those who may not be,
we'll just run through kind of a brief introduction
of what that tool is.
We'll also do the same for SageMaker.
And then we'll talk about RStudio Workbench
and SageMaker together and what that offers.
We'll look at a little bit of a demonstration
and then provide some resources
for you to continue learning on your own
and then answer any questions that come up
through the course of the presentation.
So RStudio Workbench is at its core
an R-centric development environment.
If you've used the RStudio open source software,
either at the desktop level or through RStudio server,
you're likely familiar with this experience.
You have a development environment
that gives you lots of tooling around working
with R.
Ways to manage packages, ways to manage your environment,
edit files, write code, debug.
All these tools are part
of the RStudio development environment.
RStudio Workbench gives you this environment accessible
through a browser.
It's typically something that organizations will install,
host and manage within their own infrastructure,
within their own firewalls.
We'll talk about how that model's a little bit different
with SageMaker throughout the course
of our presentation today.
One of the things that RStudio Workbench provides
that you don't find in the open source version
is you have the opportunity to support multiple versions
of R concurrently.
And there's some additional functionality
that's also available related to security
and scalability in RStudio Workbench itself.
Another kind of important component
of the RStudio development environment,
especially as it relates to the topic today,
is that there are tools there for Python interoperability.
So the ability to work in R and Python kind
of simultaneously is something that's available.
And that's not restrictive just to RStudio Workbench.
That's just a feature of really the R language,
but there's some tooling inside of RStudio,
the development environment,
that make it a little bit easier to work
with Python frameworks within kind of within an R context.
And we'll talk to why that's important here in a moment.
Amazon SageMaker, on the other hand,
is a fully managed machine learning service.
There are a large and growing number of services available
through SageMaker.
In fact, at AWS reInvent just last week,
they announced some new functionality
and some new features that are being made available
on the platform.
So it's continuing to grow, continuing to evolve.
It's one of the fastest growing kind of AWS products
that Amazon offers.
And for good reason, it's highly scalable.
It provides access to a lot
of native machine learning algorithms.
You have an integrated machine learning environment
for doing development and testing and model deployment
and things like that.
And then it gives you a really nice production ready way
to deploy machine learning models, track those models,
monitor them, kind of everything within the scope
of model development and machine learning operations
is available through the SageMaker platform.
With this said, it might be kind of easy to look
at these two different products
and these two different platforms
and to kind of pit them against one another, right?
SageMaker provides a machine learning
kind of development environment
that's built on top of JupyterLab.
They provide lots of really nice functionality.
And RStudio, on the other hand,
provides a development environment heavily focused
on the R user.
Thankfully, instead of putting these two things
against one another, instead what's happened is
we've combined the two, right?
We've said, look, what if we have RStudio
as an available editor, as an available tool
through the...
And that's been driven in large part by...
I'm just gonna mute someone real quick.
And this effort has largely been driven
by the R community.
As our customer base has grown, both professionally
as well as just the open source users
who use RStudio products every day,
there's been a growing interest
in having some sort of solution offered
through the SageMaker platform.
And for good reason, right?
SageMaker provides all these functionalities
around machine learning and tooling
that R users are likely very attracted to.
But the RStudio IDE is the place
where R users feel most at home.
And so we've worked closely with the SageMaker team
and we're happy to announce that RStudio
is an editor and an environment
that is now natively available through Amazon SageMaker.
And we'll take a look at what that looks like
in just a moment.
And we're really excited about this, right?
We think this is an awesome opportunity,
not only for us, but for R users kind of everywhere
within organizations throughout the globe
to use a tool in an environment
that they're comfortable and familiar with
with the enhancements provided by the SageMaker platform.
So a little bit of a summary of what this is, right?
It's a managed RStudio solution,
which means that running RStudio Workbench on SageMaker
means that as an organization or as an individual,
you do not need to set up, install,
maintain RStudio yourself.
Instead, that's handled on the SageMaker side.
It's simply something that you choose to opt into
when you set up your SageMaker domain.
It uses, if you have an existing RStudio Workbench license,
you can use that license
and you can carry that over into SageMaker.
It gives you access to scalable Amazon resources,
easy access to additional SageMaker features
and capabilities like some of the machine learning abilities
and model deployment and management
and other things that are part of
what SageMaker offers to users.
And you have flexible compute resources
for the different workloads
that you might be involved in and engaged in.
And we'll take a look at some of these things
in an example here in a moment.
So here's a just kind of quick little video,
and we'll actually look at this in real time
in just a moment,
but just to give you an idea of what this looks like
in SageMaker on AWS,
you go and open up the launch app dropdown,
click on RStudio if it's been configured
through your domain, open up,
you'll have the RStudio Workbench landing page.
And from there, you can start a new RStudio session.
It's really, you know, like as simple as that is,
the powerful thing is that it's that easy
to get in, to get working inside of RStudio.
Again, fully managed, hosted, maintained by SageMaker.
And then just kind of a word that I think
helps highlight the significance of this for us,
but also hopefully the significance of this
for the R community in general.
This is a quote from Tarif, the president of RStudio.
And he said,
RStudio is excited to collaborate
with the Amazon SageMaker team on this release,
as they make it easier for organizations
to move their open source data science workloads
to the cloud.
We are committed to helping our joint customers
use our commercial offerings
to bring their production workloads to Amazon SageMaker
and to further collaborations
with the Amazon SageMaker team.
And I'll kind of touch on that last component here,
which for me is kind of a personally exciting aspect
of this whole thing.
And that is that we're not done, right?
We're excited about what we've started here.
We're excited about what's available today,
but we're also excited as we look towards the future
and what we anticipate being made available
in the near future.
And we'll discuss some of what that will look like
here towards the end of our conversation today.
So with all this said and done,
let's go ahead and jump in and let's look at a demo.
Let's investigate what we can do,
what's available to us in this integration.
So I'm going to go ahead and switch over here.
Let me see if I can move zoom controls out of the way.
So I'm going to open up, here's my SageMaker domain on AWS.
I can see my user here inside of SageMaker.
And then over here, I can go to launch app
and I'll see that I have three different options here.
Studio, which is the native SageMaker interface,
RStudio, which is what we've been talking about here today.
And then Canvas is the new tool
that was just announced last week
that brings some kind of no-code functionality
into SageMaker.
If we start with the traditional experience,
just to give you an idea,
if you've never been exposed to SageMaker before,
and we open up SageMaker Studio,
this is the kind of traditional interface
through which developers will interact with SageMaker.
Like I mentioned previously,
it's built and heavily influenced by JupyterLab,
but it's also heavily modified
to provide lots of integration with the SageMaker platform
and the tooling that that platform provides.
So here we can see,
I have different tiles that I can scroll through.
I have different projects that I can start.
I have different kind of work streams that I can work on
or different styles of projects that I can work on
from within this environment.
Now, this has been an environment
that's been offered by SageMaker for quite a while.
And our users may have experienced
this environment themselves.
There's been support for R, the language,
inside of SageMaker for a while.
And typically that interaction happens
through Jupyter Notebooks.
Now, if we come back to our SageMaker landing page
and we go ahead and click on RStudio,
let's open this in a new tab here.
Now we have, and we get dropped directly
into this environment that if you've used
RStudio Workbench before is likely familiar to you.
Here we have our landing page
where we can select sessions that we wanna work on.
If we have currently running sessions,
we can create new sessions if we want to.
We can view projects that we've previously opened
over here on the right-hand side.
And we have some additional control
over suspending or quitting the sessions that are running.
We're gonna be looking at this currently running session,
this SageMaker webinar here in just a moment.
But before we jump in there
and look at some of the content there,
I wanna go through the new session process
just to kind of showcase what's available here.
We'll go ahead and open up new session.
Here we can give this session a name,
example, RStudio SageMaker session.
That's too many characters.
We'll just say example, RStudio SageMaker.
There we go.
And then here we can select the editor.
The only option available is RStudio.
So that's one thing to be aware of.
If you are familiar with RStudio Workbench,
you may be aware that it provides access
to multiple editors beyond just RStudio.
Those editors include Jupyter Notebooks,
JupyterLab, VS Code.
With the SageMaker and RStudio integration,
the only editor available through RStudio
is the RStudio editor,
the RStudio development environment.
The other option that we have here is Cluster.
Again, the only option available to us is SageMaker.
And this is just kind of an interesting note,
a little bit of a side note,
but I think it's worth noting.
And that is the fact that Amazon
is one of the first groups that's taken the launcher,
which is a component of RStudio Workbench
that allows it to integrate
with other execution engines like Kubernetes.
But Amazon's one of the first groups that's taken that
and created a custom backend for it.
And that custom backend is this SageMaker backend.
That's only available through the SageMaker integration.
But once I've selected SageMaker as my cluster,
I can then define, we'll first talk about this image.
I can define the Docker image.
I want this particular session to be run on.
As it stands currently,
there's only one default image available,
but that's something that will change in the near future.
And then the instance type here
is where I will select the EC2 instance
or the Amazon compute instance
that I want this particular session to run on.
And there's a whole host of options.
And this is one of the great kind of benefits
of this architecture.
Because one, I don't have to,
again, like I mentioned previously,
as an organization,
I don't have to manage and maintain this, right?
This is something that's set up
as part of my SageMaker domain.
SageMaker is the owner,
the maintainer of the RStudio Workbench environment.
But automatically out of the box,
if I go this route,
I have a very flexible kind of compute engine
that I can lean on.
Because I can decide when I start a new session,
what type of resources I might need.
Do I need heavy compute?
Do I have a very memory intensive process?
Am I gonna be doing some really heavy model training
with very big data?
And I can make an intelligent selection at this point
about what type of EC2 instance
I want this particular session to run on
so that I have the appropriate resources available to me
as I run this session.
The other thing that's worth noting here
is that as multiple users
are engaged with RStudio through SageMaker,
they're working kind of independently
in their own environments.
So that if one user does something in their environment,
for example, reads data in
that consumes all available memory
or consumes all available CPU,
they don't impact or negatively impact the other users
because they're all kind of in their independent environments.
I'm gonna go ahead and select the default image here,
start the session.
We'll see a new session starting up right here.
Now, because we're provisioning a separate new environment
when we come in and start a session inside of SageMaker
in the way that we've just done,
it can sometimes take a long time
to start this initial session
because it takes some time to provision the environment,
make the Docker image available,
get that image running in a container,
get everything up and running
so that we have access to our RStudio session.
But once that initial startup is complete,
that session is available
and subsequent sessions will start much more quickly.
And here we see this session didn't take too long
to take it up and running.
Let's go ahead and come in here
and just see what we have available.
And again, if you've used,
let me zoom in a little bit here.
I can, there we go.
If you've used RStudio previously,
whether at the desktop level, open source on the server,
RStudio Workbench, in any case,
this environment likely feels very familiar to you.
I've got packages that I can scroll through down here.
I can navigate my file system here.
I can look at help for different functions.
I can navigate and explore my environment.
I've got the console here where I can execute R commands.
I have this document pulled open where I can,
I've got my editor where I can open up R scripts,
R Markdown documents,
anything that I want to work with in this context.
A couple of things just kind of technically speaking
that are worth noting is one,
Amazon automatically,
so SageMaker automatically mounts a home directory
into every session.
So you'll see down here in the bottom right-hand corner
when I look at files,
I have a home directory available to me
inside this home direct, this home directory is persistent.
So this is nice because this means
that if I am working on a project and I,
let's say that I start a project in SageMaker
and I realized part of the way through
that I've under provisioned my environment,
I didn't give myself enough resources.
And if I want to be able to conclude my analysis,
I need to do it in a more heavily provisioned environment.
Well, I can terminate my existing session.
I can save my changes, first of all,
terminate my existing session,
start a new session with a new, bigger environment
based on what I've learned from the previous session.
And then once that environment starts up,
I'll have access back to the same files
I was working on previously within my home directory.
So these files follow you around.
This also means by extension
that if I install an R package, right?
If I'm in here and I say install packages,
let's do, yeah, let's install the line package.
Then this package will install into my home directory
as a user package.
And then it will be available to me
persistently from that point forward.
So I don't need to reinstall packages
every time I start a new session in SageMaker.
Those packages are persistent
and follow me into whatever session
I happen to be running on.
And we can see those packages installed.
Here, we can see the user library
that are packages I've installed to my own home directory.
And then below that, we can see the system packages,
the SageMaker instance.
So that default instance that we selected
contains a large number of kind of
commonly used data science packages.
So you'll see in here, we have,
let's scroll down a little bit.
We have the tidyverse in here.
We have data table in here.
We have a number of kind of common data manipulation
and data modeling packages that are made available here
inside of the SageMaker image by default.
Okay, so while this is continuing to run down here,
let's go ahead and look at a couple of other things
that we can do, right?
So we're in RStudio and for our users,
this is an environment that we're likely comfortable in.
So I can, if I want to, from in here,
I can start a new Shiny application if I wanted to.
I mean, this might take a minute
while this package install wraps up.
In fact, let's come back here.
We're gonna open RStudio back up and drop into our,
if we can, maybe we've frozen everything up.
Okay, once this pulls up,
we're gonna drop into our webinar environment
that we have set up already,
the running session that we currently have
for the RStudio SageMaker webinar.
Let's see if we can get this to unfreeze, maybe.
Of course, live demos are always exciting
and things never go as planned.
Okay, maybe it'll come up for us.
If not, we'll switch to another environment
and try it in there.
This is my fault for waiting off script, that's what I get.
Oops.
There we go, okay.
All right, so let's come in.
We'll leave that one running,
but let's come into this environment,
this session that we have running.
Again, one of the advantages is
that other session's kind of tied up,
but we can drop into this session and go from here.
So again, I'm in my RStudio environment.
Let's just examine a couple of things that we can do
just to verify that things kind of work and behave
the way that we would expect them to.
So if I start, if I create a new file,
I can create a new Shiny application.
We'll call this Shiny example.
Go ahead and create that.
I can run this here within SageMaker.
I'll see, in fact, let's run it in the viewer pane here.
So I can run this here.
I can see the behavior that I would expect,
which is I have my rendered Shiny application
running over here.
I can do what I would expect to do,
which is interact with that application.
If I wanted to, I could then publish this application
to a place like RStudio Connect or Shiny Apps IO.
Obviously this application
isn't of any real consequence or significance,
but this is evidence that if I wanted to,
and this is likely the case,
I can use SageMaker to do things like fully develop
my internal Shiny application that I might then share
on our internal RStudio Connect platform
or some other mechanism.
So Shiny works as I would expect it to.
Tools like Plumber also work.
If we come in here and say, let's start a new Plumber API,
we'll call this example Plumber.
We can see my Plumber file running here.
I can run this.
In fact, let's do that in the viewer pane again.
Here we go.
So I can run this API in here.
And again, I have the behavior that I would expect, right?
And the nice thing about this,
and the reason that I'm going through
kind of these simple examples is to highlight
that once you're into this environment,
it works as you would expect.
I'm able to install R packages.
I'm able to write R code.
I'm able to interact with R documents
in the way that I would expect,
whether those are source code files,
like a Shiny application or just a script file
that I'm working on,
or something like a R Markdown document
or like Plumber API or any number of other things.
So now that we've kind of verified
some of this basic functionality,
I think the natural next question,
and this was kind of my next question
once I started getting into this
and becoming more familiar with SageMaker,
and that was, okay,
I understand the significance and the advantage
from the administrative standpoint.
I don't need to maintain infrastructure.
I have a flexible environment.
I've got scalable compute resources.
I have a lot of convenience on the administrative side
when I allow SageMaker to manage the environment for me.
But as an R user, what do I get?
Do I just get RStudio?
It's just running somewhere else?
Because in most cases, I don't, as the R user,
I don't necessarily care about where RStudio is running.
I just want to make sure that I have access to it.
But the question in my mind was,
is there something that I can now do
that was difficult to do before?
And the answer to that is yes.
There's a lot of functionality within SageMaker
that becomes very easy and kind of natural to work with
once you're inside of this environment.
And so we're going to pull open an example document here.
I'm not going to spend a ton of time.
And just another note, all of the kind of code
and everything that we look at here is available on GitHub.
And I'll share a link at the end of the presentation
that will take you to the GitHub repository.
The slides will be there.
Any source code or examples or anything that we look at
will be there as well.
So don't feel like you need to frantically try to copy
and paste and follow along.
Everything's available and will be shared after the fact.
So I'm going to open up,
this is an R Markdown notebook here.
And let me just, yeah, okay.
So we're not going to walk through this entire thing.
It's a fairly lengthy document.
And I'll be honest, this is pulled from an example,
Jupyter notebook that Amazon has provided.
So there's a GitHub repository that Amazon has
that contains a whole host of SageMaker resources,
examples, getting started guides,
all kinds of resources to become familiar
with some of the SageMaker features.
So this particular example here is pulled directly
from a Jupyter notebook that they provide
that walks through how to interact with SageMaker via R.
And so I want to highlight some of the patterns.
And again, I'm not going to walk in depth
through everything that's here,
but I'm just going to highlight some of the patterns
and functionality that's available
and how we make use of it
from within this RStudio environment
that happens to be running on SageMaker.
Now, the first thing that we're going to do,
let me just, so we can start clean,
I'm going to restart my session here.
Okay.
Now, I mentioned this previously
as one of the strengths
of the RStudio development environment.
And that was the fact that it works really well
as kind of an, not a front end,
but it provides some tooling
around Python interoperability, right?
If I'm working with Python and R concurrently
within the same document,
I have some functionality that can help me out with that.
And that becomes beneficial
because one of the easiest ways to work
with some of the SageMaker tooling
is through the SageMaker Python SDK.
Now, I'm not, I don't spend a lot of time in Python.
I'm much more comfortable in R,
but fortunately the reticulate package,
which allows me to bounce back and forth
between R and Python,
could be used to allow me access to this Python SDK
from my R session.
And so that's what we're going to do here at first.
We're going to load in the reticulate package.
We're going to bring in the tidyverse as well
so that we can use the tidyverse for some things later on.
And then I'm going to bring in this SageMaker package
that's available in Python.
So here, this import function comes from reticulate.
This is loading that SageMaker SDK
into my R session as this SageMaker object.
I'm going to go ahead and run this.
This will load up.
I have already set up my Python environment.
The default image for RStudio on SageMaker
has reticulate already available at the system library.
So everything should be set up and configured
so that you can just kind of hit the ground running.
And if we open up my environment here,
we can see I've got this SageMaker object
that's actually the SageMaker module from Python.
So this SageMaker object in my R session
now gives me access to all the tooling that's available
in that SageMaker Python module.
Now we're going to create a couple of different resources
that we can use as we go through this process
of training and tuning this model.
So we're going to create this session object
and this bucket that identifies an Amazon S3 bucket
that we're going to use to store artifacts,
data and objects that we create
throughout the course of this document.
And then one of the really, I think, convenient features
of running RStudio directly inside of SageMaker
is the fact that I don't have to,
I'm already permissioned, right?
Like the role that I have when I open up
and start running SageMaker is the role that I assume
whenever I execute any of these SageMaker commands.
So I don't need to reauthenticate myself to Amazon.
That permission is already scoped and attached to me
as I start running here.
So I can grab that role right here
by running this get execution role function.
And notice as I'm interacting here, right?
I'm using this SageMaker module that we see here.
And this SageMaker module is a Python module
that I've loaded into my R session.
And so I access the methods and different objects
attached to that module with this dollar sign,
just as if I was manipulating a list
or other object here inside of R.
So here I'm running these different functions
or these different methods off of SageMaker
to get this functionality.
Okay, so what we're gonna do is, and again,
a lot of this comes directly from this Jupyter Notebook,
but we're gonna pull down this Avalone dataset
that comes from the UCI Machine Learning Repository.
And we're gonna do a little bit of manipulation
on that dataset.
Not anything super crazy, we're gonna download it.
We'll notice that if we scroll over,
the sex column here is a character column,
but it really should be factors
because we only have three different levels here.
So we'll go ahead and change that to be a factor.
We can look at a summary of what this dataset now looks like.
And we see that in height,
we have some that have zero height.
And we wanna take a look at what those are.
So we can go ahead and use ggplot to investigate those.
We see a couple of outliers here.
And then we have some infants over here
and we've added some jitter to this
just so that we can gain more visibility into the data.
But we can see that we have a couple of observations
over here that are infants
that have zero height reported.
So we're gonna go ahead and remove any observations
where the height value is zero.
And now we're gonna go through
and we're going to prepare this dataset for training.
So we're gonna come in here
and we're going to create these kind of
one hot encoding columns for the sex column
and then remove the sex column itself here.
The other thing that we're gonna do
is we're gonna move rings,
which is the target of our machine learning model
that we're going to build.
We're gonna move that into the first column of our dataset.
SageMaker expects the first column to be the target value
when you define models.
And so in order to comply with that,
we're gonna move rings over here to the front.
Okay, now we're gonna split up our data
so that we can get training on this.
We're gonna go ahead and sample 70% of our data for training
and then the remaining 30% we're gonna split in half
and have half for testing and half for validation.
And we're doing that here.
And again, I'm not gonna step through everything.
The other thing to highlight,
a couple of things to highlight
as we kind of round this example out is,
one, like this is not intended to be an example
of totally great and perfect machine learning practices.
Rather, the intention here is to kind of highlight
how to use some of the SageMaker features
and functionality from within RStudio.
And then the other thing to note
is that I am by no means a SageMaker expert.
So somebody like I becoming more and more familiar as we go.
And thankfully, we have some folks from Amazon
on the line today as we get questions towards the end
that might be able to help
and provide some guidance there.
But just worth noting that I'm by no means
consider myself a SageMaker expert.
Okay, so we're gonna go ahead and trim down our data set
to be only 500 rows.
And the reason for this is because we wanna do some stuff
towards the end where we're going to submit predictions
to the, or we're going to submit data for prediction
to an endpoint that we deploy.
And we have to have,
the maximum payload we can submit is 500 rows.
So we're gonna go ahead and trim down our test set
to be 500 rows here.
And then we're gonna write this data out as CSV files
to our local directory.
Now, the reason we write this data out as CSV files
is so that we can upload it to S3.
And that's what we're gonna do here.
We're gonna create these different files in S3
that represent our training validation and test data.
Okay.
And then we're going to define these input types
so that when we train our model,
SageMaker knows what data it's dealing with.
So we're gonna create these train input
and validation input types that just identify
where the data is living and what type of data it is.
Okay.
Now we're going to go ahead and start getting ready
to train our XGBoost model.
So SageMaker has ready-made containers
for training certain types of models.
XGBoosting is one of those model types.
So here we can go ahead and retrieve this model
or this container definition.
And if we look at this,
and again, this is all using that SageMaker SDK
that we've loaded into our R session.
Here we can see, here's where the container is living,
and we can reference that
as we go through our training process.
Now we're gonna define our estimator.
Again, I'm not gonna go through everything
that's available here.
All this content will be available,
but we're gonna go ahead and define the estimator
that we wanna use by providing it with the container
that we wanna train with,
the instance type that we wanna do our training on,
and where the output should go from that model
and things of that nature.
Now, once we've defined what our estimator is,
we can go through and define hyperparameters
that we wanna explore
and how we plan on tuning those hyperparameters.
Again, I'm not gonna walk through everything
that's involved here,
but the idea is, again,
I'm making use of this SageMaker module
that's available to me in my R session
through this SageMaker object.
We're also identifying our validation metric here.
Now, once this is all said and done,
we can build the tuner that we're going to use
to tune our model.
We can give this job a name, define our input data.
So here's the path in S3 where that input data is stored.
Here's the path in S3
where the validation of data is stored.
And then finally, we can use this fit method
of this tuner object that we created
to actually fit this tuner,
which will go through and explore this hyperparameter space
that we've defined
and identify the best fitting model.
Now, this job has now kicked off.
And the thing that's significant to understand
is we've defined this training job
entirely to be run and managed by SageMaker, right?
So again, we're using R, we're using RStudio,
but we've used these tools to orchestrate this training job
that is now being executed by SageMaker itself.
And if we scroll back up just a little bit
to see where we define our estimator,
we can see that we've defined an instance type
that we're gonna run this training job on.
And we've defined some other attributes
so that SageMaker knows when we fit this tuner
and when we train this model,
it goes out and provisions the necessary resources,
grabs the appropriate container
that has all the available and necessary dependencies
to run this, to train this XGB model,
and then runs through that training job
in a totally separate environment.
That's why when we ran this,
if we come back down to where we're fitting our tuner here,
scroll down, there we go.
If we, when we look at how we ran this,
we can see that our R session isn't tied up, right?
We can still, I can still do things here in the console.
Oops.
I have a, I still have a listening R session
because my R session isn't being used
to do the model training.
It's SageMaker managed resources
that are handling the model training at this point.
Now I can query that process to see how far along it is
using Boto3, which is another Python SDK
for Amazon services.
So again, we'll follow the same pattern
that we use with SageMaker.
We'll load in this Boto3 module as an R object,
and then we can query our SageMaker tuning job
by running a few commands from this Boto3 library.
So here we can see, I have four in-progress models.
The job status is currently in progress.
No models have yet succeeded,
and no models have yet failed.
And if I look back up here just a little bit,
I can see that I set this max parallel jobs parameter
when I set up my tuner to be four.
So that's why we see four parallel training jobs
taking place, and I have a maximum jobs set to be 10.
So once I've gone through 10 different iterations here,
this particular tuning will be complete,
and we'll be able to extract what the best model was
from that process.
Go ahead and run this one more time
and see if we've completed any yet.
We see that we still have four in-progress models.
So I'll let that continue running
and just kind of talk through
what the rest of this would look like.
Once we've run this model,
we can then grab what the best training job was
out of the status of the tuning job that we've run.
We can investigate what the metrics are of that model,
and we can also figure out where that model's being stored
inside of S3.
So we have lots of functionality
around how we manipulate the models
that get created from our tuning jobs.
And then at this point, we have two different options.
Typically the point of building a model
isn't just to build the model itself,
but to then do something with it,
to leverage that model in some way,
to run new data through the model
and generate predictions on that new data.
And SageMaker provides kind of two frameworks for doing that.
One is batch transformations,
which is, I'm not necessarily looking
for real-time inference,
but rather I'm looking for a way to run a batch of new data
through my model all at one time.
And that's something that's supported
through the SageMaker SDK.
This walks through an example of setting up,
and I'm not gonna walk through it right now,
but this walks through an example
of how to set up that batch transformation
and run a set of new test data through the model,
collect those results,
and then compare them to the original observations.
So that's one option.
The other option here is, let me scroll down a little bit.
Okay, the other option,
which is the one that I'll focus on here for a moment,
is deploying the model.
SageMaker provides native tooling
for being able to take a model
that's been trained in SageMaker
and deploy it directly into SageMaker itself as an endpoint.
And then from that endpoint,
you can now generate real-time predictions
by submitting either HTTP requests to the endpoint
through other tools,
like you might create a Shiny application
that queries that endpoint
and generates real-time requests based on user input.
You might have a front-end mobile application
that's built within your organization
that queries this model
through this deployed endpoint that you create.
Like I mentioned, SageMaker has native support
for deploying these endpoints for certain types of models.
This XGB model that we've trained here
is one such example of those.
And so here we can see,
we use this deploy method on our tuner object
to deploy this model into this environment.
And then once that model has been deployed,
we can define a serializer for it,
and we can use this predict method on the model itself
to submit requests to that endpoint, generate predictions,
and bring those predictions back
into our existing R session.
Now, let me come back up
and just see if our tuning job has made any progress here.
And we can take a look at where we're at.
Okay, so we have four succeeded models.
We have four models
that are currently in progress being trained.
I'm not going to wait for that to conclude,
but we see that we're making progress here,
and we can continue to query that progress
using this Boto3 library
that we've brought into our R session.
Now, I'm going to come back into,
let me see if I can get back into it here.
Okay, so here I'm in SageMaker.
This is the SageMaker studio,
so the JupyterLab interface.
And the one other thing that I wanted to highlight
is if I come down here, I can see this.
I have the SageMaker resources view
that's available to me here,
and I can come in and I can look at this endpoint section,
and I can see these are previously deployed endpoints
that I have published in preparation
for our discussion today.
So here I can see,
these are both models trained on the same data,
just on separate days,
but I can come in here and click on one of these,
and I can open up an entire view
into what that model looks like.
And here I can submit test requests to the model.
I can view how this model is set up,
what the endpoint for the model is,
information about the runtime of the model.
If I had specified that I wanted to enable model tracking,
I could view things like quality, explainability, bias.
These types of metrics are supported in SageMaker
as long as I configure my deployment
to allow for tracking and metric collection,
which I haven't done in this case,
but it is something that's available
if that's something that's of interest.
Now, to back up a little bit, right?
If we come back here for a second,
what's the big deal?
What's the excitement about this?
Well, there's kind of two things.
One is maybe the, depending on your perspective,
might be the less exciting of the two things here,
but that is the fact that you can, as an RStudio customer,
you can bring existing RStudio Workbench licenses
into SageMaker and use RStudio Workbench
within your SageMaker environment.
Now you have an entirely managed hosted solution
of RStudio Workbench that you don't need to worry
about maintaining, installing, updating,
or anything like that, but it remains flexible
and gives you lots of resources at your disposal
for doing your day-to-day analysis
inside of a native RStudio environment.
The other thing that we've just looked at
is once you're in that environment as an R user,
you gain access to a whole collection of SageMaker tools
from model training and tuning to deployment,
monitoring, all those things are now available to you
directly from within your SageMaker environment.
Now, today, that access is managed through reticulate,
like we walked through in the example just now.
So using the reticulate package,
we can bring in the SageMaker SDK,
and then we can use that to interact
with the SageMaker environment,
from model training and tuning to deployment
and any other things that we might want to interact with.
Now, kind of as we look towards the future
and what's coming up in this space,
one of the kind of immediate term things to be addressed
is that there will soon be the ability
to bring custom images for RStudio Workbench
in Amazon SageMaker.
So if we come back here,
just to remind us of what that looks like,
if we come back into our home screen here,
when we start a new session,
currently there's only one image available to select from,
but that will change in the near future,
and there will be the ability
to bring additional custom images into RStudio Workbench.
You could define your own images within your organization.
There may be predefined other images that are available
that could contain different libraries,
different versions of R
that would support the use case that you're after.
The other thing that we're really excited about
and actually working on bringing to the table
is RStudio Connect managed by SageMaker
in the same way that we see RStudio Workbench
managed by SageMaker today.
Now, it is possible today to use RStudio Connect
and install it and manage within your own environment
in connection with RStudio Workbench
installed and managed by SageMaker.
And what that process would look like
is you would develop and do your work
inside of RStudio Workbench in the SageMaker environment.
And then when it came time to publish
what you were working on,
you would just publish that to Connect.
And Connect might, in this case,
Connect would be something that you've installed
and managed somewhere else.
But down the road,
we anticipate bringing RStudio Connect to SageMaker as well
in much in the same way
that we have RStudio Workbench integrated there today.
When you set up the RStudio integration on SageMaker,
one of the things that you have the ability to do
is to predefine your both RStudio Connect URL
if you already have an RStudio Connect environment
and you want to automatically configure that
for publishing from Workbench.
You can do that when you set up Workbench on SageMaker.
And then the other thing is you can automatically define
or you can set up and define an RStudio Package Manager URL
for users to use when you go through the setup process.
Finally, a few resources.
We put out a blog post about this,
announcing this integration a few weeks ago.
There's a link to that here.
AWS has put out a number of different blog posts.
There are two of them are linked from here.
This news blog is kind of a general blog about,
let me just open this up,
kind of a general blog about what the offering is
and what's available today.
And then this getting started post here
is kind of a more technical post
that walks through from the administrative side.
What do you need to do to set up RStudio
on Amazon SageMaker?
How does it work?
What do you need to do?
How do you get the license into the right place?
And what do you do on your SageMaker domain
to configure this to work?
And then finally, there's this GitHub link here.
Let me open this up.
So this GitHub repository contains the slides from today,
as well as the example code that we walked through.
Like I mentioned, that example code
pulls from this repository here.
That's a whole collection of R examples
provided by the SageMaker team.
These are all in the form of Jupyter notebooks,
but they can easily be kind of repurposed
or re-imagined into standard R scripts
or R markdown documents, whatever the case is,
now that RStudio itself is available
within the SageMaker environment.
And James, would you be able to copy that GitHub link
into the chat as well?
Yeah, I can.
I'm anticipating that question.
Let me grab that.
It's a great idea.
Perfect.
All right.
There we go.
Okay, so there's the link
to this GitHub repository in the chat.
So you can see the links to the additional resources
under the slides.
If you open up the slides directory in here,
it contains a PDF output of all the slides.
And that resources page has the resources links
that we just discussed.
Finally, as much as I'd like to take credit
for the fun theme of these slides,
I pulled these from a website
that made these freely available,
and I'm grateful for that.
And some of the comic book graphics and things like that
were also provided by Freepic.
And as a final note,
thank you everyone for your time today.
I know there's probably lots of questions,
and so we'll take some time here at the end
to address as many of those as we can
or give the folks from Amazon a chance to address those
if there's some better suited for them.
But I just want to say, I really appreciate the time.
We at RStudio are very excited about this.
And I just want to reiterate
what Tarif had mentioned in his quote,
and that is that we're committed to continuing
to build out this integration.
We were really excited about the momentum we've seen.
We're really excited about the early adoption
that we've seen.
And personally, just from my perspective,
I'm really excited about the capabilities
that this introduces into the R ecosystem.
And I'm excited to see what things people are now able to do
with the solution that perhaps previously were unavailable
or more difficult to do now that we have
this SageMaker integration directly available.
So with that, I'll see what questions we have.
I think there's folks that have been watching
the Slido links.
So Rachel, I don't know if you want to kind of-
Happy to help with that.
And thank you so much, James.
That was awesome.
And those slides are beautiful.
So we do also have some people on
from the Amazon SageMaker team as well,
who you may have seen were helping answer questions
in Slido too.
So I just want to take a second
to have them introduce themselves as well.
Michael and Georgios, if you want to jump on for a second.
Hi, my name is Michael Xie.
I'm an AIML specialist solution architect from AWS.
Thanks for having me for today's session.
Really looking forward to having conversations
on RStudio on SageMaker.
Thank you.
Hello from me as well.
My name is Georgios Xinas.
I'm a machine learning specialist solutions architect
as well as Michael, I'm based in London
and I'm really happy to be here today
and hopefully can answer questions that the community has.
Awesome, thank you.
And I'll start by going through the Slido questions
and the ones that were the most upvoted,
but we want to make sure to answer everything as well.
So I've talked with Lou on our team
about writing a blog post
that goes through all the Q&A as well.
But just to address this one, James,
the most upvoted question was,
do you need a paid RStudio Workbench license
in order to use RStudio in SageMaker?
Yes, the way that we've shown this integration today,
it only works with a paid RStudio Workbench license.
And that can be just to elaborate
on that a little bit further,
that can be either standard,
which is a license for one server, one activation
or enterprise, which gives you unlimited server activations.
Both of those models will work with SageMaker.
If you do standard,
then SageMaker becomes your one installation of RStudio.
If you have enterprise,
you could be running RStudio in SageMaker
as well as have your own on-prem solution.
You can, you have lots of flexibility at that point.
But the answer to that question is yes,
it does require a license for RStudio Workbench.
Thank you.
And I see Eduardo, you asked a question
that a lot of people have upvoted as well.
And I'd love to hear from the community too,
if you want to read that question, Eduardo,
if you're still on.
And I can, I'll, I can read it now.
And if you want to add any more context,
please feel free to jump in.
But the question was,
how does SageMaker help ML solutions designed
with R into production?
Is there a specific ML package
that SageMaker can deal with?
For example, tidy models or caret?
Yeah, I can speak to that with, like I said,
I'm not a SageMaker expert.
So I'm happy to be corrected by the folks on the call.
I'm happy to be corrected by the folks
on the Amazon side as well.
But from my understanding today, right?
Most of the functionality when you interact directly
with SageMaker is going to come through
that SageMaker Python SDK.
So like we use reticulate, we brought that module in
and then we use methods and functions from that module
to manipulate and train a model and deploy the model
and all those types of things.
Now, one of the kind of underlying components of that
is the fact that all that whole process,
that model training, tuning, deployment process
is all actually happening in Python, right?
The container that we ran was running XGBoost
and interacting with that via Python.
We were managing it from the R side with reticulate,
but most of the work was being done on the Python side.
Now, there is support in SageMaker
for being able to define kind of your own custom containers
and images for model training and deployment
where you could define ways to interact with R processes.
But to my understanding today,
there's not a lot of native R tooling there yet.
Now, that's something I'd love to see change
and something that I'm hopeful will change over time
as this partnership continues to grow and expand.
I've had discussions with folks
about some changes I'd like to see, for example,
and this isn't an indication that this will happen,
but my own personal just utopian future
would be that there is an R native SDK for SageMaker
that allows R users to natively interact
with SageMaker resources,
as well as support for things like tidy models
and SageMaker.
Now, there's a lot of work to be done to get there.
And again, this isn't a promise
that that will ever come to fruition,
but it's something that I'd like to work towards
and would love to see happen.
And today-
This is Michael.
So I'd like to add on what James has provided.
In SageMaker, you can definitely bring in your R containers.
So you can package your tidy models,
correct into a container and start a training
and also hosting your models built natively within R
into SageMaker.
And then, you know, and doing all the ML Ops CLCD
along with SageMaker using the SageMaker SDK
within your R environment.
So we do have a couple of resources and artifacts
showing how to do so.
So happy to share those information.
Awesome. Thank you, Michael.
And James, I know you addressed this question
a bit towards the end,
but I think it'd be good to address as well.
But Sheikha asks,
is it a good solution for host-
Is this a good solution for hosting
and developing Shiny applications?
Yeah. So for developing, absolutely, right?
It gives you a valid environment
where you can develop these Shiny applications.
And the nice thing is you can develop these applications
in a way that natively reaches out to
and interacts with your AWS resources.
So it becomes really easy
because you're already operating inside of AWS
to read data in from S3
and to interact with other AWS resources
without needing to worry about like credential management.
Now that's on the development side.
On the like publication and hosting side,
this story is a little bit different today
because currently RStudio Connect,
which would be kind of the preferred method
of deploying and hosting Shiny applications,
isn't something that's offered through SageMaker.
That's the next step for us is making that available.
And it's something that's under current conversation
to have done.
And so we're hopeful that that will be available shortly.
But in the meantime,
what that means is you would develop
inside of RStudio Workbench on SageMaker
and then you would publish or deploy that application
to some other location,
whether that's RStudio Connect
that you have separately installed
and managed somewhere else,
or Shiny Apps IO or some other solution.
The challenge with that is the fact that
once you kind of cross that boundary
and you're no longer operating
inside of that kind of SageMaker domain,
now you have to start thinking about like,
how do I, you know,
if I'm interacting with other AWS services,
for example, like S3,
now I need to make sure that I have my credentials
under control and I know what I'm doing
in terms of like authenticating to the service.
When RStudio Connect becomes available through SageMaker,
I imagine that that story
will become a little bit more clear
because you'll be able to publish directly
from Workbench on SageMaker to Connect on SageMaker
and you'll still have that same kind of
nice native authentication that's already taken place.
Awesome, thank you.
Rayon, I see you asked a question around
advantages of using tidy models within SageMaker.
Would you want to jump on
and add any context to that question too?
Hi, can you hear me?
Yes, I can.
Yeah, thank you very much.
I think partly this question was answered.
Was just asking if tidy models
take any advantage of SageMaker
and whether it runs in a separate environment.
But as James said,
at the moment Python is doing the heavy, heavy lifting.
Yeah, that's correct.
Again, I would love,
this is still early stage for us.
We're beyond excited about what we're seeing
and what we see as we look towards the future
and we'll continue to work towards that future
with the SageMaker team.
I would love to see SageMaker added as an engine
on the tidy model side.
Again, whether that happens or not remains to be seen,
but I can see ways in which that could happen.
But again, you're entirely correct in the fact that today,
if you're trying to do use
some of the native tooling and technology,
what's available is primarily on the Python side.
Thankfully, we do have a good entry point in there
via Reticulate,
but I'm hoping that kind of the R aspect
will start to kind of build out over time here as well.
Great, thank you.
Maisie, I see you asked a great question as well
from the Zoom chat.
And I think you copied over to Slido too,
if you'd want to ask that one live.
Sure.
I did again.
Oh yeah, so when I,
before I saw the RStudio launch in the studio lab
in SageMaker, I started kind of building a workflow
with the R kernel in the notebook instance.
And so I wanted to just know like
what would be the difference between,
or what would, yeah,
what would be the difference between using the R kernel
in the notebook instance
versus like RStudio in the studio lab?
Yeah, really good question.
Like functionality wise,
there's not gonna be much of a difference
in terms of like what you can or can't do
or what types of workflows are, aren't supported.
Really what it comes down to,
I think is just a preference, right?
Like if I'm comfortable using the R kernel
in the native kind of Jupyter style environment,
then I can do that.
And I can interact with my environment that way.
What we found,
and one of the main motivating factors
behind this whole integration has been that
many R users have come to SageMaker and said,
look, we'd really love to have RStudio
because it's home to us, right?
We feel comfortable.
We know what to do.
We have fewer barriers to entry
when we're using an RStudio type environment.
And so it's really just kind of
an environmental preference, right?
I myself am much more comfortable in RStudio
than I am inside of Jupyter.
So any chance I have to work inside of
an RStudio environment when using R
is something that I'm gonna jump at.
So in terms of functionality,
I don't think you have really any significant differences.
It's just a matter of preference
in terms of which environment suits you better.
Got it, thank you.
Thank you.
Next question was an anonymous one that was,
is RStudio Workbench fully on SageMaker
or is it using SageMaker as a launcher backend,
which would still require a front-end Workbench server?
Oh man, such a good question.
I meant to talk to this point
because it's a very nuanced question,
but it's a good one.
So when you set up your SageMaker domain
to support RStudio,
one of the things that you do
is you identify a persistent instance
that will host RStudio.
So you're right,
there does need to be some persistent environment
that runs, that then launches these sessions
into SageMaker and allow SageMaker
to manage the resources behind those sessions.
So there is that persistent environment.
I believe the default,
and it doesn't need to be very big
because there's not any computation happening there.
That environment gets automatically provisioned for you
when you set up this inside your SageMaker domain
and you can decide what instance type you want.
I'm trying to remember,
I think T3 medium is kind of the default.
And I believe that SageMaker gives that to you for free,
like as part of the RStudio offering on SageMaker,
that that host environment
that's just running constantly
to support the RStudio front end is there,
but it's still maintained by SageMaker.
And I don't believe it's something that's charged for.
Yeah, just a quick comment on that, James,
you're right, both on the instance type,
it's T3 medium and it's also free.
Perfect, thank you for confirming.
Awesome, there's another question that was,
what are the expectations for environment management?
Is it managed by AWS, RStudio, me?
Will I have access to the same environment
two years from now to maintain reproducibility?
Yeah, so I think there's two sides to this question
because environment can mean a couple of things.
So one is like your local R environment
is within your control.
So if you want, you can install packages,
those will go into your home directory,
that home directory is persistent, like we mentioned.
So different sessions that start
will have the same access to the same files
and packages that you were working with previously.
And what that means is that there's support for things,
there's automatically, because of that fact,
there's automatically support for things like RM.
So if you wanted to create a very specific collection
of packages for a very specific project
and have those version to a very specific set of versions,
that's totally supported through tools like RM.
In combination with what you're getting out of SageMaker.
So your local environment, totally within your control,
and certainly you can set it up
so that you can come back to that environment
two years down the road
and reinstantiate it the way that it was
and continue working from where you left off.
The other side of this is,
what about the administrative environment?
The server, the settings for RStudio Workbench,
things like that.
That's something that falls under the SageMaker control,
under SageMaker's control, right?
So when you say, look, I'm gonna set up
and manage RStudio Workbench through SageMaker,
part of what you're doing is saying,
I'm gonna let SageMaker
handle the RStudio administrative tasks for me,
which can be a huge benefit
because I don't have to worry about that stuff anymore.
And in this particularly,
I'm really excited to see how this helps.
We work with a lot of organizations
that are very Windows centric
and all of our software
needs to be installed in Linux environments.
And that sometimes is a big hurdle to overcome.
Now all of a sudden you can say, look,
I'm just gonna let SageMaker manage and host it for me.
And I don't need to worry about
all the Linux stuff behind the scenes.
As long as I can work with AWS
to get the domain set up right,
then I've got an environment I can use.
But the other thing that that means is
that I'm letting SageMaker handle that for me.
So if there's questions or concerns
or things that I want adjusted there,
or features that I want enabled or whatever,
that becomes a conversation to have with SageMaker.
And then it looks like, sorry, just real quick.
There was a clarification in the chat about,
it says the question was about environments
has more to do with system libraries
rather than R packages.
So the system libraries component typically will come,
well, two things.
One is you have currently today,
when you're in your session running on SageMaker,
you have root access to that container.
So when you go into the terminal tab of RStudio,
you have already assumed the root role.
So you can modify that container as you need.
So if there's a system dependency
that you're in the middle of a project
and you're like, oh no, I needed this thing.
You should be able to get in,
add it to that container at that time
and run with it from there.
Now that's not persistent though, right?
So if that session terminates
and that container goes away and I start a new session,
I'm gonna have to reinstall that dependency at that point.
I can do it, but it's not persistent.
The other side is this custom image functionality
that we anticipate coming to SageMaker in the near future,
which would allow you to identify at the Docker level
as you build out these Docker files,
what system dependencies you need available
in your environment.
And that's how you would manage those persistently.
Awesome, thanks James.
And for anyone who asked the question,
feel free to jump in to add more context to
and unmute yourself as well.
And I will say, let's maybe take one more.
I unfortunately am booked back to back.
So I've got to jump off for a minute.
Sorry about that James,
during a bad time of monitoring.
I would love to hang around and answer all these questions
and part of me really wants to, but it's irresponsible.
So let's do one more question then I've got to drop off.
Awesome, so one other question is,
you put a lot of pressure on me to ask the questions.
I'm just going to go from the most upvoted.
So it was, this might be more for Amazon,
but will RStudio be available
in the new Amazon SageMaker Studio lab?
Yeah, so yeah, I think I can take this question.
So for now SageMaker Studio lab is only supposed to work
with JupyterLab, but if we see that there is interest
from the community, we can take that feedback back
and then work with you guys from the RStudio side
to see if we can somehow find a good solution
that could help the whole community.
Awesome, thank you.
James, I know you have to drop to another meeting.
To the Amazon team, do you have a few more minutes
or do you have to jump as well?
Myself, I also have another meeting to go to.
Yeah, we will try to answer some questions on the chat
on the, I guess the Slido will remain open,
if I'm not mistaken.
Yes, the Slido will remain open.
And what we can also do is take all the questions
from Slido and answer those in a blog post format as well.
So I'll share that with the recording.
Once we have that available.
So the recording will go up to the RStudio YouTube
before tomorrow, and then we'll work
on the Q&A blog post too.
But I also just wanted to give anyone else
from the Amazon side a moment
to introduce themselves as well.
I know a few people from the Amazon sales team
were on as well, who may have had to drop,
but if anyone's here, feel free to unmute yourself
and jump in too.
Well, thank you all so much for joining.
There's so many great questions.
I really appreciate it.
And we'll do our best to make sure
that we answer every single one of them.
I'm happy to stick around for just like general questions
around resources or meetups or anything that you have.
But unfortunately, I know James
and the AWS team have to jump.
But thank you all so much for joining.
Have a great rest of the day.